GUI.md, before:

# Using the L2-UD GUI

## Installation
1. download the L2-UD GUI binary:
   - [Unix-like systems](https://github.com/harisont/L2-UD/releases/download/v0-2l/l2-ud-gui) (only tested on Manjaro Linux)
   - [Windows](https://github.com/harisont/L2-UD/releases/download/v0-2l/l2-ud-gui.exe) (only tested on Windows 10)
2. create a shortcut to start the GUI in one click:
   - on Linux, copy [the desktop file](l2-ud-gui.desktop) wherever you have your desktop files (`~/.local/share/applications/` maybe?)
   - on MacOS, I have no idea
   - on Windows, create a Desktop shortcut to [l2-ud-gui.ps1](l2-ud-gui.ps1), right click on it and make it executable on click by setting `Properties > Target` to `powershell.exe -ExecutionPolicy Bypass -File "WHATEVER-PATH-WAS-ALREADY-THERE"` (mind the quotes!)

## Usage
When you launch the L2-UD GUI, a new tab will be opened in your browser.
You should see something like this:

![start screen](img/start.png)

### Specifying input files
The first two input fields are mandatory and used to specify the full paths (including the `.conllu` extension) of two __parallel__ [CoNNL-U](https://universaldependencies.org/format.html) files, for instance

```
~/Data/ud-treebanks-v2.9/UD_English-PUD/en_pud-ud-test.conllu
```

and

```
~/Data/ud-treebanks-v2.9/UD_Swedish-PUD/sv_pud-ud-test.conllu
```

If a path is invalid, for example because of a missing extension, the corresponding input field will turn red upon clicking the Search button:

![invalid path](img/invalid_path.png)

If you only specify the input files, leaving the other fields blank, clicking search will display all sentences in the treebank:

![null search](img/null_search.png)

### Running a query
Queries are specified in the third input field:

![query for presens perfekt](img/presens_perfekt.png)

The example query in the picture is

```haskell
TREE_ (FEATS_ "VerbForm=Sup") [AND [LEMMA "ha", FEATS_ "Tense=Pres"]]
```

This is a _simple_ or _monolingual_ query, looking for present perfect constructions in the Swedish treebank (important note: __monolingual queries are always matched in the L2, i.e. right-hand-side treebank!__).
It reads as

> Look for (sub)trees (`TREE_`) where the root is a supinum (`(FEATS_ "VerbForm=Sup")`) and one of the direct dependents is the present perfect of the verb "ha" (`AND [LEMMA "ha", FEATS_ "Tense=Pres"]`).

Note that only the subtrees matching the query are now highlighted in bold (cf. last row).

With some knowledge of Swedish, this query can be rewritten more concisely as

```haskell
TREE_ (FEATS_ "VerbForm=Sup") [FORM "har"]
```

It is then very easy to modify the query for other structurally similar tenses:

- `TREE_ (FEATS_ "VerbForm=Sup") [FORM "hade"]` (plusperfect)
- `TREE_ (FEATS_ "VerbForm=Sup") [FORM "ha"]` (Márton, how is this called?)

Queries can also be _parallel_ or _bilingual_. For instance, we can use the following pattern to serach for sentences where a Swedish present perfect corresponds to a passive present tense in English:

```haskell
TREE_ (FEATS_ "VerbForm={Part->Sup}") [AND [LEMMA "{be->ha}", FEATS_ "Tense=Pres"]]
```

This produces the following results:

![bilingual query](img/bilingual_query.png)

Note how the second hit here is a false positive, due to the fact that "are" in the clause "there are already..." is also a direct dependent of the main lexical verb "dropped".
This is unfortunate, but unavoidable given how conjunctions are treated in UD.

The basic query language ("UD patterns") is thoroughly described [here](https://github.com/GrammaticalFramework/gf-ud/blob/master/doc/patterns.md), while the extended version for parallel (bilingual) queries (`{X -> Y}` syntax) is documented [here](https://github.com/harisont/L2-UD#l1-l2-patterns).

## Adding a replacement rule
The last input field can be used to specify a _replacement rule_ to be applied identically to both languages.
This is useful to better highlight the relevant part of each query result.

Understanding replacement rules, which are described [alongside the basic query language](https://github.com/GrammaticalFramework/gf-ud/blob/master/doc/patterns.md), can be slightly more challenging, especially if for those not familiar with the UD standard. The plan is then to collect useful replacement rules down here.

As a first example,

```haskell
CHANGES [FILTER_SUBTREES (OR [POS "VERB", DEPREL_ "root", DEPREL_ "csubj", DEPREL_ "ccomp", DEPREL_ "xcomp", DEPREL_ "advcl", DEPREL_ "acl"]) (OR [DEPREL_ "aux", DEPREL_ "cop"]), PRUNE (DEPREL_ "aux") 0, PRUNE (DEPREL_ "cop") 0]
```

uses dependency relations to isolate verb constructions of max depth 2, thus producing, in conjunction with the first query, the following output:

![replacement rule](img/replacement_rule.png)

## CoNNL-U mode
Switching to CoNNL-U mode allows to inspect the CoNNL-U (sub)trees __corresponding to bold text in the default text mode__:

![CoNNL-U mode](img/conllu.png)

## Saving the search results
With most browsers, selecting the entire page and copying the selection to a text file produces a valid CoNNL-U (or text, in text mode) file[^1] where L1 and L2 trees are interleaved, as in:

```
1	has	have	AUX	VBZ	Mood=Ind|Number=Sing|Person=3|Tense=Pres|VerbForm=Fin	3	aux	5:aux	ADJUSTED=True
2	been	be	AUX	VBN	Tense=Past|VerbForm=Part	3	aux	5:aux	ADJUSTED=True
3	rising	rise	VERB	VBG	Tense=Pres|VerbForm=Part	0	root	0:root	ADJUSTED=True|ORIG_LABEL=root

1	har	ha	AUX	VB|PRS|AKT	Mood=Ind|Tense=Pres|VerbForm=Fin|Voice=Act	2	aux	4:aux	ADJUSTED=True
2	ökat	öka	VERB	VB|SUP|AKT	VerbForm=Sup|Voice=Act	0	root	0:root	ADJUSTED=True|ORIG_LABEL=root

1	’ve	have	AUX	VBP	Mood=Ind|Tense=Pres|VerbForm=Fin	2	aux	4:aux	ADJUSTED=True
2	requested	request	VERB	VBN	Tense=Past|VerbForm=Part	0	root	0:root	ADJUSTED=True|ORIG_LABEL=root

1	har	ha	AUX	VB|PRS|AKT	Mood=Ind|Tense=Pres|VerbForm=Fin|Voice=Act	2	aux	4:aux	ADJUSTED=True
2	bett	be	VERB	VB|SUP|AKT	VerbForm=Sup|Voice=Act	0	root	0:root	ADJUSTED=True|ORIG_LABEL=root

1	have	have	AUX	VBP	Mood=Ind|Tense=Pres|VerbForm=Fin	2	aux	4:aux	ADJUSTED=True
2	suggested	suggest	VERB	VBN	Tense=Past|VerbForm=Part	0	root	0:root	ADJUSTED=True|ORIG_LABEL=root

1	har	ha	AUX	VB|PRS|AKT	Mood=Ind|Tense=Pres|VerbForm=Fin|Voice=Act	2	aux	4:aux	ADJUSTED=True
2	föreslagit	föreslå	VERB	VB|SUP|AKT	VerbForm=Sup|Voice=Act	0	root	0:root	ADJUSTED=True|ORIG_LABEL=root

...
```

The trees representend in such files can be visualized, for instance with [CoNNL-U viewer](https://universaldependencies.org/conllu_viewer.html).

## Planned features
- render CoNNL-U as trees directly in the application
- make it possible to download search results as two separate CoNNL-U files, to make it easy to use results as inputs for further querying
- better file input, if I figure out how to use Electron
- some kind of feedback when the query is valid but there are no results

[^1]: technical note: this works because all extracted subtrees are adjusted so that they have a root node and valid (sequential) IDs.

Commit message:

under the hood and some other minor fixes to tutorial

GUI.md, after:

# Using the L2-UD GUI

## Installation
1. download the L2-UD GUI binary:
   - [Unix-like systems](https://github.com/harisont/L2-UD/releases/download/v0-2l/l2-ud-gui) (only tested on Manjaro Linux)
   - [Windows](https://github.com/harisont/L2-UD/releases/download/v0-2l/l2-ud-gui.exe) (only tested on Windows 10)
2. create a shortcut to start the GUI in one click:
   - on Linux, copy [the desktop file](l2-ud-gui.desktop) wherever you have your desktop files (`~/.local/share/applications/` maybe?)
   - on MacOS, I have no idea
   - on Windows, create a Desktop shortcut to [l2-ud-gui.ps1](l2-ud-gui.ps1), right click on it and make it executable on click by setting `Properties > Target` to `powershell.exe -ExecutionPolicy Bypass -File "WHATEVER-PATH-WAS-ALREADY-THERE"` (mind the quotes!)

## Usage
When you launch the L2-UD GUI, a new tab will be opened in your browser.
You should see something like this:

![start screen](img/start.png)

### Specifying input files
The first two input fields are mandatory and used to specify the full paths (including the `.conllu` extension) of two __parallel__ [CoNNL-U](https://universaldependencies.org/format.html) files, for instance

```
~/Data/ud-treebanks-v2.9/UD_English-PUD/en_pud-ud-test.conllu
```

and

```
~/Data/ud-treebanks-v2.9/UD_Swedish-PUD/sv_pud-ud-test.conllu
```

If a path is invalid, for example because of a missing extension, the corresponding input field will turn red upon clicking the Search button:

![invalid path](img/invalid_path.png)

If you only specify the input files, leaving the other fields blank, clicking search will display all sentences in the treebank:

![null search](img/null_search.png)

### Running a query
Queries are specified in the third input field:

![query for presens perfekt](img/presens_perfekt.png)

The example query in the picture is

```haskell
TREE_ (FEATS_ "VerbForm=Sup") [AND [LEMMA "ha", FEATS_ "Tense=Pres"]]
```

This is a _simple_ or _monolingual_ query, looking for present perfect constructions in the Swedish treebank (important note: __monolingual queries are always matched in the L2, i.e. right-hand-side treebank!__).
It reads as

> Look for (sub)trees (`TREE_`) where the root is a supinum (`(FEATS_ "VerbForm=Sup")`) and one of the direct dependents is the present perfect of the verb "ha" (`AND [LEMMA "ha", FEATS_ "Tense=Pres"]`).

Note that only the subtrees matching the query are now highlighted in bold (cf. last row).

With some knowledge of Swedish, this query can be rewritten more concisely as

```haskell
TREE_ (FEATS_ "VerbForm=Sup") [FORM "har"]
```

It is then very easy to modify the query for other structurally similar tenses:

- `TREE_ (FEATS_ "VerbForm=Sup") [FORM "hade"]` (plusperfect)
- `TREE_ (FEATS_ "VerbForm=Sup") [FORM "ha"]` (Márton, how is this called?)

Queries can also be _parallel_ or _bilingual_. For instance, we can use the following pattern to serach for sentences where a Swedish present perfect corresponds to a passive present tense in English:

```haskell
TREE_ (FEATS_ "VerbForm={Part->Sup}") [AND [LEMMA "{be->ha}", FEATS_ "Tense=Pres"]]
```

This produces the following results:

![bilingual query](img/bilingual_query.png)

Note how the second hit here is a false positive, due to the fact that "are" in the clause "there are already..." is also a direct dependent of the main lexical verb "dropped".
This is unfortunate, but difficult to avoid given how conjuncts are treated in UD.

The basic query language ("UD patterns") is thoroughly described [here](https://github.com/GrammaticalFramework/gf-ud/blob/master/doc/patterns.md), while the extended version for parallel (bilingual) queries (`{X -> Y}` syntax) is documented [here](https://github.com/harisont/L2-UD#l1-l2-patterns).

### Adding a replacement rule
The last input field can be used to specify a _replacement rule_ to be applied identically to both languages.
This is useful to better highlight the relevant part of each query result.

Understanding replacement rules, which are described [alongside the basic query language](https://github.com/GrammaticalFramework/gf-ud/blob/master/doc/patterns.md), can be slightly more challenging, especially if for those not familiar with the UD standard. The plan is then to collect useful replacement rules down here.

As a first example,

```haskell
CHANGES [FILTER_SUBTREES (OR [POS "VERB", DEPREL_ "root", DEPREL_ "csubj", DEPREL_ "ccomp", DEPREL_ "xcomp", DEPREL_ "advcl", DEPREL_ "acl"]) (OR [DEPREL_ "aux", DEPREL_ "cop"]), PRUNE (DEPREL_ "aux") 0, PRUNE (DEPREL_ "cop") 0]
```

uses dependency relations to isolate verb constructions of max depth 2, thus producing, in conjunction with the first query, the following output:

![replacement rule](img/replacement_rule.png)

### CoNNL-U mode
Switching to CoNNL-U mode allows to inspect the CoNNL-U (sub)trees __corresponding to bold text in the default text mode__:

![CoNNL-U mode](img/conllu.png)

### Saving the search results
With most browsers, selecting the entire page and copying the selection to a text file produces a valid CoNNL-U (or text, in text mode) file[^1] where L1 and L2 trees are interleaved, as in:

```
1	has	have	AUX	VBZ	Mood=Ind|Number=Sing|Person=3|Tense=Pres|VerbForm=Fin	3	aux	5:aux	ADJUSTED=True
2	been	be	AUX	VBN	Tense=Past|VerbForm=Part	3	aux	5:aux	ADJUSTED=True
3	rising	rise	VERB	VBG	Tense=Pres|VerbForm=Part	0	root	0:root	ADJUSTED=True|ORIG_LABEL=root

1	har	ha	AUX	VB|PRS|AKT	Mood=Ind|Tense=Pres|VerbForm=Fin|Voice=Act	2	aux	4:aux	ADJUSTED=True
2	ökat	öka	VERB	VB|SUP|AKT	VerbForm=Sup|Voice=Act	0	root	0:root	ADJUSTED=True|ORIG_LABEL=root

1	’ve	have	AUX	VBP	Mood=Ind|Tense=Pres|VerbForm=Fin	2	aux	4:aux	ADJUSTED=True
2	requested	request	VERB	VBN	Tense=Past|VerbForm=Part	0	root	0:root	ADJUSTED=True|ORIG_LABEL=root

1	har	ha	AUX	VB|PRS|AKT	Mood=Ind|Tense=Pres|VerbForm=Fin|Voice=Act	2	aux	4:aux	ADJUSTED=True
2	bett	be	VERB	VB|SUP|AKT	VerbForm=Sup|Voice=Act	0	root	0:root	ADJUSTED=True|ORIG_LABEL=root

1	have	have	AUX	VBP	Mood=Ind|Tense=Pres|VerbForm=Fin	2	aux	4:aux	ADJUSTED=True
2	suggested	suggest	VERB	VBN	Tense=Past|VerbForm=Part	0	root	0:root	ADJUSTED=True|ORIG_LABEL=root

1	har	ha	AUX	VB|PRS|AKT	Mood=Ind|Tense=Pres|VerbForm=Fin|Voice=Act	2	aux	4:aux	ADJUSTED=True
2	föreslagit	föreslå	VERB	VB|SUP|AKT	VerbForm=Sup|Voice=Act	0	root	0:root	ADJUSTED=True|ORIG_LABEL=root

...
```

The trees representend in such files can be visualized, for instance with [CoNNL-U viewer](https://universaldependencies.org/conllu_viewer.html).

## Planned features
- render CoNNL-U as trees directly in the application
- make it possible to download search results as two separate CoNNL-U files, to make it easy to use results as inputs for further querying
- better file input, if I figure out how to use Electron
- some kind of feedback when the query is valid but there are no results

## What's happening under the hood?
This is a GUI for [L2-UD's `match` command](https://github.com/harisont/L2-UD#querying-parallel-l1-l2-treebanks), which allows running parallel queries on UD treebanks by combining [UD-based subtree alignment](https://github.com/harisont/concept-alignment) with [UD tree pattern matching](https://github.com/GrammaticalFramework/gf-ud/blob/master/doc/patterns.md).

It uses a slightly modified, 2L or "bilingual" version of the main L2-UD tool (where "L2" stands for "second language"), optimized for comparing different languages rather than learner language with correction hypotheses.

The GUI is implemented [threepenny-gui](https://hackage.haskell.org/package/threepenny-gui) and will possibly evolve in a proper web application.

[^1]: technical note: this works because all extracted subtrees are adjusted so that they have a root node and valid (sequential) IDs.
